feat(docs): add react navigation migration doc (#23243)
expo/expo: docs/pages/router/migrate/from-react-navigation.mdx

Refer to the [platform-specific modules](/router/advance/platform-specific-modules) guide for info on switching UI based on the platform.

### Replacing the NavigationContainer

The global React Navigation [`<NavigationContainer />`](https://reactnavigation.org/docs/navigation-container/) is completely managed in Expo Router. Expo Router provides systems for achieving the same functionality as the `NavigationContainer` without needing to use it directly.

<Collapsible summary="API substitutions">

### ref

The `NavigationContainer` ref should not be accessed directly. Use the following methods instead.

#### `resetRoot​`

Navigate to the initial route of the application. For example, if your app starts at `/` (recommended), then you can replace the current route with `/` using this method.

```js
import { useRouter } from 'expo-router';

function Example() {
  const router = useRouter();

  return (
    <Text
      onPress={() => {
        // Go to the initial route of the application.
        router.replace('/');
      }}>
      Reset App
    </Text>
  );
}
```

#### `getRootState`

Use `useRootNavigationState()`.

#### `getCurrentRoute`

> Unlike React Navigation, Expo Router can reliably represent any route with a string. Use the [`usePathname()`](/docs/features/linking#usepathname) or [`useSegments()`](/docs/features/linking#usesegments) hooks to identify the current route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike React Navigation, Expo Router can reliably represent any route with a string. Use the [`usePathname()`](/router/reference/screen-tracking/) or [`useSegments()`](/router/reference/typed-routes/#relative-paths) hooks to identify the current route.
```

- We don't or haven't documented `usePathname()`. The only reference I could find to it is: https://docs.expo.dev/router/reference/screen-tracking/
- Also, we refer to `useSegments()` in https://docs.expo.dev/router/reference/typed-routes/#relative-paths

#### `getCurrentOptions`

> Use the [`useLocalSearchParams()`](/docs/features/linking#useLocalSearchParams) hook to get the current route's query parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`useLocalSearchParams()`](/router/reference/search-parameters/) hook to get the current route's query parameters.
```

#### `addListener`

The following events can be migrated:

#### `state`

> Use the [`usePathname()`](/docs/features/linking#usepathname) or [`useSegments()`](/docs/features/linking#usesegments) hooks to identify the current route. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`usePathname()`](/router/reference/screen-tracking/) or [`useSegments()`](/router/reference/typed-routes/#relative-paths) hooks to identify the current route. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.
```

#### `options`

> Use the [`useLocalSearchParams()`](/docs/features/linking#useLocalSearchParams) hook to get the current route's query parameters. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`useLocalSearchParams()`](/router/reference/search-parameters/) hook to get the current route's query parameters. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.
```

### props

Migrate the following `<NavigationContainer />` props:

#### `initialState`

> In Expo Router, you can rehydrate your application state from a route string (e.g. `/user/evanbacon`). Use [redirects](/docs/features/linking#redirect) to handle initial states. See [shared routes](/docs/features/shared-routes) for advanced redirects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Expo Router, you can rehydrate your application state from a route string (for example, `/user/evanbacon`). Use [redirects](/docs/features/linking#redirect) to handle initial states. See [shared routes](/router/advanced/shared-routes/) for advanced redirects.
```

Couldn't find a link for: /docs/features/linking#redirect after migration so not sure what should go there

Avoid using this pattern in favor of deep linking (e.g. user opens your app to `/profile` rather than from the home screen) as it is most analogous to the web. If an app crashes due to a particular screen, it's best to avoid automatically navigating back to that exact screen when the app starts as it may require reinstalling the app to fix.

#### `onStateChange`

> Use the [`usePathname()`](/docs/features/linking#usepathname), [`useSegments()`](/docs/features/linking#usesegments), and [`useGlobalSearchParams()`](/docs/features/linking#useGlobalSearchParams) hooks to identify the current route state. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`usePathname()`](/router/reference/screen-tracking/), [`useSegments()`](/docs/features/linking#usesegments), and [`useGlobalSearchParams()`](/router/reference/typed-routes/#relative-paths) hooks to identify the current route state. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.
```

> - If you're attempting to track screen changes, follow the [Screen Tracking guide](/docs/migration/react-navigation/screen-tracking).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you're attempting to track screen changes, follow the [Screen Tracking guide](/router/reference/screen-tracking/).
```

- React Navigation recommends avoiding [`onStateChange`](https://reactnavigation.org/docs/navigation-container/#onstatechange).

#### `onReady`

In React Navigation, [`onReady`](https://reactnavigation.org/docs/navigation-container/#onready) is most often used to determine when the splash screen should hide or when to track screens using analytics. Expo Router has special handling for both these use cases. Assume the navigation is always ready in for navigation events in Expo Router.

> - See the [Screen Tracking guide](/docs/migration/react-navigation/screen-tracking) for info on migrating analytics from React Navigation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- See the [Screen Tracking guide](/router/reference/screen-tracking/) for info on migrating analytics from React Navigation.
```

> - See the [Splash Screen feature](/docs/features/splash) for info on handling the splash screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- See the [Splash Screen feature](/routing/appearance/#splash-screen) for info on handling the splash screen.
```

#### `onUnhandledAction`

> Actions are always handled in Expo Router. Use [dynamic routes](/docs/features/dynamic-routes) and [404 screens](/docs/features/unmatched) in favor of [`onUnhandledAction`](https://reactnavigation.org/docs/navigation-container/#onunhandledaction).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Actions are always handled in Expo Router. Use [dynamic routes](/routing/create-pages/#dynamic-routes) and [404 screens](/routing/error-handling/#unmatched-routes) in favor of [`onUnhandledAction`](https://reactnavigation.org/docs/navigation-container/#onunhandledaction).
```

#### `linking`

The [`linking`](https://reactnavigation.org/docs/navigation-container/#linking) prop is automatically constructed based on the files to the `app/` directory.

#### `fallback`

The [`fallback`](https://reactnavigation.org/docs/navigation-container/#fallback) prop is automatically handled by Expo Router. Learn more in the [Splash Screen guide](/docs/features/splash.md).

#### `theme`

> Use the `<ThemeProvider />` component instead. Learn more in the [Themes guide](/docs/migration/react-navigation/themes).

Reviewer: I don't think we have a link for "Themes" that can be used here.

#### `children`

> The `children` prop is a automatically populated based on the files in the `app/` directory, and the currently open URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `children` prop is automatically populated based on the files in the **app/** directory and the currently open URL.
```

---
title: Migrate from React Navigation

> sidebar_title: from React Navigation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_title: React Navigation
```

"from" looks weird in the sidebar:
<img width="284" alt="CleanShot 2023-07-10 at 18 42 22@2x" src="https://github.com/expo/expo/assets/10234615/b36649f2-83ee-46ad-aaea-57ae56f5c00e">

Let's keep it "React Navigation".

Author: Migrate "React Navigation" also doesn't seem right. Open to other suggestions.

Reviewer: I think instead of having a section for "Migration" itself, we can re-title this page to: "Migrate from React Navigation" and move this doc inside the "Reference".

We follow this pattern for other sections as well. 

<img width="784" alt="CleanShot 2023-07-13 at 00 34 10@2x" src="https://github.com/expo/expo/assets/10234615/1a84630c-5788-49d1-9a8d-f04f70c05bcb">

The "from" doesn't follow the pattern of how we name doc titles in the sidebar. Alternatively, if you think "Migration" should be its own section, then let's change it to "From React Navigation" in the sidebar. Although, I'd push for the first suggestion since its the pattern that every section can follow (but at the same time I also understand since this is new section, there can be high traffic for folks and looking for migration guide -- but I don't have a concrete data to support that right now.

Refer to the [platform-specific modules](/router/advanced/platform-specific-modules) guide for info on switching UI based on the platform.

### Replacing the NavigationContainer

The global React Navigation [`<NavigationContainer />`](https://reactnavigation.org/docs/navigation-container/) is completely managed in Expo Router. Expo Router provides systems for achieving the same functionality as the `NavigationContainer` without needing to use it directly.

<Collapsible summary="API substitutions">

### ref

The `NavigationContainer` ref should not be accessed directly. Use the following methods instead.

#### `resetRoot​`

Navigate to the initial route of the application. For example, if your app starts at `/` (recommended), then you can replace the current route with `/` using this method.

```js
import { useRouter } from 'expo-router';

function Example() {
  const router = useRouter();

  return (
    <Text
      onPress={() => {
        // Go to the initial route of the application.
        router.replace('/');
      }}>
      Reset App
    </Text>
  );
}
```

#### `getRootState`

Use `useRootNavigationState()`.

#### `getCurrentRoute`

> Unlike React Navigation, Expo Router can reliably represent any route with a string. Use the [`usePathname()`](/router/reference/screen-tracking/) or [`useSegments()`](/router/reference/typed-routes/#relative-paths) hooks to identify the current route.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike React Navigation, Expo Router can reliably represent any route with a string. Use the [`usePathname()`](/router/reference/hooks/#usepathname) or [`useSegments()`](/router/reference/hooks/#usesegments) hooks to identify the current route.
```

Updating internal links from https://github.com/expo/expo/pull/23355/files so that we can merge them together or unblock this PR.

#### `getCurrentOptions`

> Use the [`useLocalSearchParams()`](/router/reference/search-parameters/) hook to get the current route's query parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`useLocalSearchParams()`](/router/reference/hooks/#uselocalsearchparams) hook to get the current route's query parameters.
```

#### `addListener`

The following events can be migrated:

#### `state`

> Use the [`usePathname()`](/router/reference/screen-tracking/) or [`useSegments()`](/router/reference/typed-routes/#relative-paths) hooks to identify the current route. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`usePathname()`](/router/reference/hooks/#usepathname) or [`useSegments()`](/router/reference/hooks/#usesegments) hooks to identify the current route. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.
```

#### `options`

> Use the [`useLocalSearchParams()`](/router/reference/search-parameters/) hook to get the current route's query parameters. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`useLocalSearchParams()`](/router/reference/hooks/#uselocalsearchparams) hook to get the current route's query parameters. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.
```

### props

Migrate the following `<NavigationContainer />` props:

#### `initialState`

In Expo Router, you can rehydrate your application state from a route string (for example, `/user/evanbacon`). Use [redirects](/docs/features/linking#redirect) to handle initial states. See [shared routes](/router/advanced/shared-routes/) for advanced redirects.

Avoid using this pattern in favor of deep linking (e.g. user opens your app to `/profile` rather than from the home screen) as it is most analogous to the web. If an app crashes due to a particular screen, it's best to avoid automatically navigating back to that exact screen when the app starts as it may require reinstalling the app to fix.

#### `onStateChange`

> Use the [`usePathname()`](/router/reference/screen-tracking/), [`useSegments()`](/docs/features/linking#usesegments), and [`useGlobalSearchParams()`](/router/reference/typed-routes/#relative-paths) hooks to identify the current route state. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`usePathname()`](/router/reference/hooks/#usepathname), [`useSegments()`](/router/reference/hooks/#usesegments), and [`useGlobalSearchParams()`](/router/reference/hooks/#useglobalsearchparams) hooks to identify the current route state. Use in conjunction with `useEffect(() => {}, [...])` to observe changes.
```
